the two most likely largest inventions
of our generation are the Internet and
the mobile phone they've changed the
world however largely to our surprise
they also turned out to be the perfect
tools for the surveillance state it
turned out that the capability to
collect data information and connections
about basically any of us and all of us
is exactly what we've been hearing
throughout the summer through
revelations and leaks about Western
intelligence agencies mostly US
intelligence agencies watching over the
rest of the world we've heard about
these starting the revelations from June
6th Edward Snowden started leaking
information top-secret classified
information from the US intelligence
agencies and we started learning about
things like prism and xkeyscore and
others and these are examples of the
kinds of programs you as intelligence
agencies are run and running right now
against the whole rest of the world and
if we look back about the forecasts and
surveillance by George Orwell well it
turns out that George Orwell was an
optimist we are right now seeing much
larger scale of tracking of individual
citizens than he could have ever
imagined then this here is the infamous
NSA data center in Utah due to be opened
very soon it will be both a
supercomputing Center and a data storage
center you could basically imagine it
has a
large hall filled with hard drives
storing data they are collecting and
it's a pretty big building how big well
I can give you the numbers 140,000
square meters but that doesn't really
tell you very much maybe it's better to
imagine it as a comparison you think
about the largest IKEA store you've ever
been this is five times larger how many
hard drives can you fit in an ikea store
right
it's pretty big we estimate that just
the electricity bill for running this
data center it's going to be in the tens
of millions of dollars a year and this
kind of wholesale surveillance means
that they can collect our data and keep
it basically forever keep it for
extended periods of time keep it for
years keep it for decades and this opens
up completely new kinds of risks to us
all and what this is is that it is
wholesale wholesale blanket surveillance
or everyone well not exactly everyone
because the US intelligence only has a
legal right to monitor foreigners they
can monitor foreigners when foreigners
data connections end up in United States
or pass through the United States and
monitoring foreigners doesn't sound too
bad
until you realize that I'm a foreigner
and you're a foreigner in fact 96% of
the planet are foreigners right so it is
wholesale blanket surveillance of all of
us all of us who use telecommunications
and the internet but don't get me wrong
there are actually types of surveillance
that are ok I love freedom but even I
agree that some surveillance is fine if
the law enforcement is trying to find a
murderer or they're trying to catch a
drug lord or trying to prevent a school
shooting and they have leads and they
have suspects and it's perfectly fine
for them to tap the suspects fall
and to intercept his internet
communications I'm not arguing that at
all but that's not what programs like
frizam are about they are not about
doing surveillance on people that they
have reason to suspect of some
wrongdoings they're about doing
surveillance on people they know are
innocent so the four main arguments
supporting surveillance like this well
the first of all is that whenever you
start discussing about these revelations
there will be naysayers trying to
minimize the importance of these
revelations saying that you know we knew
all this already we knew it was
happening there's nothing new here and
that's not true don't let anybody tell
you that we knew this already because we
did not know this already our worst
fears might have been something like
this but we didn't know this was
happening now we know for a fact it's
happening we didn't know about this we
didn't know about prism we didn't know
about xkeyscore we didn't know about
cyber trance we didn't about tribal
double-arrow we did not know about sky
rider all these different programs run
by US intelligence agencies but now we
do and we did not know that US
intelligence agencies goes to extreme
such as infiltrating standardization
bodies to sabotage encryption algorithms
on purpose
and what that means is that you take
something which is secure an encryption
algorithm which is so secure that if you
use an algorithm to encrypt one file
nobody can decrypt that file even if
they take every single computer on the
planet just to decrypt that one file
it's gonna take millions of years so
that's basically perfectly safe
uncrackable you take something which is
that good and then you weaken it on
purpose making all of us less secure as
an end result the real-world equivalent
would be that intelligence agencies
would force some secret pin code into
every single house alarm so they could
get into every single house because you
know bad people might have house alarms
but it will also make all of us less
secure as an end result backdoor
encryption algorithms just boggles the
mind but of course these intelligence
agencies are doing their job this is
what they have been told to do do
signals intelligence monitor
telecommunications monitor internet
traffic that's what they're trying to do
and since most and very big part of the
internet traffic today is encrypted
they're trying to find ways around the
encryption one way is to Savitt our
encryption algorithms which is a great
example about how you as intelligence
agencies are running loose they are
completely out of control and they
should be brought back under control so
what do we actually know about the
lake's everything is based on the files
leaked by mr. Snowden the very first
prism slides from the beginning of June
detail a collection program where the
data is collected from service providers
and they actually go and name the
service providers they have access to
they even have a specific date on when
the collection of data began for each of
the service providers so for example
they name the collection from Microsoft
started on the 11th of September 2007
for Yahoo on the 12th of March 2008 and
then others Google Facebook Skype Apple
and so on and every single one of these
companies denies they all say that this
simply isn't true that they are not
giving backdoor access to their data yet
we have these files so it's one of the
parties lying or is there some other
alternative explanation and one
explanation would be that these parties
these service providers are not
cooperating instead they've been hacked
that would explain it
they aren't cooperating they've been
hacked in this case they've been hacked
by their own government that might sound
outlandish but we already have cases
where this has happened for example the
case of the flame malware which we
strongly believe was authored by the
as government and which to spread
subverted the security of the Windows
Update Network meaning here the company
was hacked by their own government and
there's more evidence supporting this
theory as well
there's Fiegel from germany leaked more
information about the operations run by
the elite hacker units operating inside
these intelligence agencies inside NSA
the unit is called ta o tailored access
operations and inside GCHQ which is the
UK equivalent
it's called NAC network analysis centre
and these recent leaks of these three
slides detail on operation run by this
GCHQ intelligence agency from united
kingdom targeting a telco here in
belgium and what this really means is
that an EU countries intelligence agency
is breaching the security of a telco of
a fellow EU country on purpose and they
discuss it in their slide completely
casually business as usual here's the
primary target here's the secondary
target here's the teaming they probably
have a team building on Thursday evening
in a pub they even use cheesy PowerPoint
clip art like you know success when they
gain access to services like this what
the hell then there's the argument that
ok yes this might be going on but then
again other countries are doing it as
well all countries point maybe that's
true
many countries point at all of them but
let's take an example let's take for
example Sweden I'm speaking Sweden
because Sweden has a little bit similar
law to the United States when your data
traffic goes through Sweden their
Intelligence Agency has a legal right by
the law to intercept that traffic
alright how many Swedish decision makers
and politicians and business leaders use
every day us-based services like you
know run window
or OS X or use Facebook or LinkedIn or
store their data in clouds like iCloud
or SkyDrive or Dropbox or maybe use
online services like Amazon Web Services
or Salesforce and the answer is every
single Swedish business leader does that
every single day and then we turn it
around how many American leaders use
Swedish web mails and cloud services and
the answer is zero so this is not
balanced it's not balanced by any mates
not even close
and when we do have the occasional
European success story even those that
typically end up being sold to the
United States like Skype used to be
secure it used to be end-to-end
encrypted then it was sold to the United
States today it no longer is secure so
once again we take something which is
secure and then we make it less secure
on purpose making all of us less secure
as an outcome and then the argument that
the United States is only fighting
terrorists it's the war on terror you
shouldn't worry about it well it's not
the war on terror yes
part of it is war on terror and yes
there are terrorists and they do kill
and maim and we should fight them but we
know through these leaks that they've
used the same techniques to listen to
phone calls of European leaders to tap
the email of residents of Mexico and
Brazil to read email traffic inside
United Nations headquarters and EU
Parliament and I don't think they're
trying to find terrorists from inside EU
Parliament right it's not the war on
terror part of it might be and there are
terrorists but are we really thinking
about terrorists as such an existential
threat that we're willing to do anything
at all to fight our the America is ready
to throw away the Constitution and throw
it into trash just because there are
terrorists and the same thing with the
Bill of Rights and all the amendments
and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the EU Convention
human rights and fundamental freedoms
and the press freedom do we really think
terrorism is such an existential threat
we're ready to do anything at all what
people are cared about
terrorists and then they think that
maybe that surveillance is okay because
you know they have nothing to hide
feel free to survey me if that helps and
whoever tells you that they have nothing
to hide
simply haven't thought about this long
enough because we have this thing called
privacy and if you really think that you
have nothing to hide please make sure
that's the first thing you tell me
because then I know that I should not
trust you with any secrets because
obviously you can't keep a secret but
people are brutally honest with the
Internet
and when these leaks started many people
were asking me about this and and I have
nothing to hide I'm not doing anything
bad or anything illegal yet I have
nothing that I would in particular like
to share with an intelligence agency
especially a foreign intelligence agency
and if we indeed need a big brother I
would much rather have a domestic Big
Brother than a foreign big brother and
when the leaks started the very first
thing I tweeted about this was a comment
about how you know when you've been
using search engines you've been
potentially leaking all that to US
intelligence and two minutes later I got
a reply by somebody called Kimberly from
the United States challenging me like
why am I worried about this like what am
i sending to worry about this am i
sending naked pictures or something and
my answer to Kimberly who was that what
I'm sending is none of your business and
it should be none of your government's
business either because that's what it's
about it's about privacy privacy is not
negotiated it should be built in to all
the systems we use
and one thing we should all understand
is that we are brutally honest with
search engines you show me your search
history and I'll find something
incriminating or something embarrassing
there from file in five minutes
we are more honest with search engines
than we are with our families search
engines know more about you than your
family members know about you and this
is all the kind of information we're
giving away or giving away to United
States and surveillance changes history
we know this through examples of corrupt
presidents like Nixon imagine if he
would have had the kind of surveillance
tools that are available today and let
me actually quote the person of
president of Brazil miss Dilma Rousseff
she was one of the targets of NSA
surveillance her email was read and she
spoke at the United Nations headquarters
and she said if there's no right to
privacy there can be no true freedom of
expression and opinion and therefore
there can be no effective democracy
that's what it's about privacy is the
building block of our democracies and to
quote a fellow security researcher
Marcus Ranum
he said that the United States is right
now treating the Internet as it would be
treating one of its colonies so we're
back to the age of colonization and we
the foreign users of the Internet we
should think about Americans as our
masters so mr. Snowden
he's been blamed for many things some
are blaming him for causing problems
with the u.s. cloud industry and
software companies with these
revelations and blaming Snowden for
causing problems to the US cloud
industry would be the equivalent of
blaming Al Gore for causing global
warming
so what is there to be done should we
worry no we shouldn't worry we should be
angry because this is wrong and it's
rude and it should not be done but
that's not gonna really change the
situation what's gonna change the
situation for the rest of the world is
to try to steer away from systems built
in the United States and that's much
easier said than done
how do you do that a single country any
single country in Europe cannot replace
and build replacements for the u.s. made
operating systems and cloud services but
maybe you don't have to do it alone
maybe you can do it together with other
countries and the solution is open
source by building together open free
secure systems we can go around such
surveillance and then one country
doesn't have to solve the problem by
itself they only have to solve one
little problem and to quote a fellow
security researcher hard on Mare one
country only has to make a small wave
those small waves together become a tide
and the tide will lift all the boats up
at the same time and the tide we will
build with secure free open-source
systems will become the tide that will
lift all of us up and above the
surveillance state thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]
you